As of this video, it's been 478 days since we
started wearing barefoot shoes to do almost
everything, except...
My theory is that my feet
were not ready to play sports like pickleball
or tennis in barefoot shoes, as I have pretty
heavy and clumsy feet. In the last year or so
since picking up tennis, I've been making do
with my old worn down pair of running shoes.
But running shoes are designed for moving in
one direction — forward. While tennis requires
unpredictable movement in all directions.
So like a proper tennis player wannabe,
whenever I'm not playing well, I blame my
equipment. To bring my game to the next level,
perhaps it's time to get new shoes. The last 478
days of getting used to barefoot shoes were just
preparation for this moment. So here I have with
me the Tolos Soleil Transition. We've been playing
tennis with these for a couple of months and
not gonna to lie, we had to make a few tweaks
to make it work. But you'll find out why when
it comes to wearing barefoot shoes for tennis,
we feel like transitional is just the
right word to sum up our experience.
For my first pair of barefoot shoes for tennis,
I'm looking at three things. One, if I don't like
the way a shoe looks, then I'm less likely to want
to put it on. Ideally, I don't want something that
screams barefoot shoes. And in this regard, these
have a simple, clean design and do not feel out
of place with my usual athleisure style. Two,
apart from lacking lateral support and the fact
that they are falling apart, my biggest problem
with my old running shoes is the same problem I
have with conventional shoes in general. The toe
box is too narrow. I'm sure most people know the
feeling where your feet have expanded after a day
of walking and your toes are hurting from being
crammed inside of your shoes. After getting used
to barefoot shoes, that's what it always feels
like when I'm wearing these or other non foot-shaped shoes.
I just can't wait to get home and
finally take them off. In comparison, you can see
how much roomier the design of the toe box is on a
pair of foot-shaped shoes. This allows our toes to
splay naturally. As far as off the court comfort,
things are pretty straightforward. These are
probably the least constrictive shoes that we own,
and I've walked a whole day in these with
no problems. But tennis shoes usually have
reinforced structures for stability and a lot
of padding for a snug feet, making it feel
like your feet are one with the shoes. With
barefoot shoes, there's a delicate balance.
You want your toes to be able to splay, but too
much wiggle room could mean a lack of that locked
down feeling that is ideal for higher intensity
movements. On the court, we are reminded that this
is not a serious tennis shoe. It's not only got a
wide toe box, it's also generous with the vertical
space. The high volume makes it quite comfortable
as a casual shoe off the court, but not the most agile
feeling shoe on the court. And as a not so agile
person, whenever I'm playing tennis with these,
I kept having the thought that I should have gone
half a size smaller for a more athletic fit. Glo
suggested tying a runner's knot, which helped
to make it feel more secure at the ankles, but
it didn't directly address the problem of having
too much wriggle room at the forefoot. Then he had
the idea of filling some of that excess space by
using insoles. We tried insoles from our other
pair of barefoot shoes from Feelgrounds. These are
only 3 mm, but I could already feel a noticeable
improvement. So, we tried thicker sports insoles
from our old running shoes, which gave more of
that locked down feeling, and it made playing tennis
in these much more enjoyable. One more benefit of
using sport specific insoles is that they provide
a small boost in cushion and bounce, which is nice
for my clumsy feet as these shoes have relatively
firm soles for a barefoot shoe. But that may also
be because these have thicker soles than that of
most barefoot shoes. Which brings us to the third
point. Most barefoot shoes have a sole height of
under 10 mm. Granted, not all midsoles are made
the same, but on paper that is a bit thinner
than what we are comfortable with for sports.
For my first barefoot shoes for tennis, I wanted
slightly more cushion than the industry average.
These shoes, specifically the transition sole
that we have, have a pretty rare stack height
of 13 mm. Tolos markets the transition soles as the
option for those who are new to barefoot shoes.
And while we are not new to barefoot shoes in that
sense, we are new to wearing barefoot shoes when
playing sports. Considering I'm just learning the
game of tennis and playing at a low intensity,
all I want is a pair of shoes that don't strangle
my feet and are cushioned enough for sports. And
these are my transitional shoes. Would this be
my pick in a year or two from now? Honestly,
unless I don't get any better at tennis, the
answer is probably not. These are casual shoes
that I can comfortably place some tennis in. But
if and when I get good enough at the game, I will
want something that is more of a tennis-first
barefoot shoe, which as far as we know doesn't
really exist at the moment. Of course, I'm not the
only one in this story. When Glo first started
playing tennis with me, he would wear his usual
narrow tennis shoes, but after a few sessions,
he realized maybe it wasn't worth it, considering
how low intensity our sessions were, where he's
mostly in a coaching capacity anyway. He even
tried wearing his Feelgrounds canvas sneakers
instead, but was worried that the fabric wouldn't
be durable enough. In the end, he mostly played
barefooted, which is obviously not ideal. But now
and for the foreseeable future, the Tolos Soleils are
a comfortable barefoot option for him to coach me
in. So, what do we think about barefoot shoes for
court sports like tennis or pickleball? Here are
our suggestions based on our limited experience.
First, know your body and consider the intensity
you'll be playing at. We are relatively active
and injury-free, and we know we are not going
to be playing at a very high intensity. If you
are in similar shoes, no pun intended, we think
barefoot shoes are perfectly fine. Unless you
plan to slide around all over the court, we think
they can be great as training shoes or for playing
casual pickleball and tennis. But finding the
right barefoot shoes suitable for your game can
be the tricky bit. Most barefoot shoes by design
have relatively thin soles. We have counted out
many models of athletic barefoot shoes because the
sole height seemed a little low for our liking.
Our second suggestion, which is something we
realized during the course of trying these shoes,
is to not count out insoles. Using padded insoles
can feel a little counter to the whole concept
and culture of barefoot shoes. But if you really
like the shape and comfort of a particular shoe,
or if it just feels a little too roomy for
sports, insoles have the potential to make
it work. For now, we are happy playing
with these, but we'll be on the lookout
for a more ideal foot-shaped shoe for tennis.
Hopefully, they'll arrive before I turn pro.